Now that we've seen a simple example of an async servlet and how that works,
we can now take a look at a more complex,
more realistic example.
In the previous example,
we were simply offloading work to another thread
managed by the servlet container.
This probably doesn't help our application scale.
So here we're going to see a way of doing that.
So first let's create a new package called complex,
as this is a more complex example.
And in this package,
we create a new servlet called
TransferDataAsyncServlet that again will support async.
Add a doGet method,
and inside here we'll start an async request and set a timeout.
We will set the timeout to be 15 minutes in this case.
So the idea here, which we will simulate,
is that we are going to download large files.
And rather than type a container thread to do this,
we create our own threads to handle this long running process.
To do this, we create our own thread pool,
then manage to download through that thread pool.
So to create our thread pool, we're looking in Java,
which will create an executer to do that.
We'll create the executer when the application is first loaded.
And of course the ideal way to do that is to create a ServletContextListener.
So let's create a class called ClientTransfer,
and have this class implement ServletContextListener.
In here,
we will create the executer and spin up the threads that the executer will use.
So the idea is we only want to do work when necessary,
and then block these threads when there's no work to do.
So for the faster download we'll do that work,
if not, the executer will simply block waiting from all work to become available.
We'll set a limit on the number of threads.
So in this class, create a constant called Client_Thread_Count and set it to 10,
so we are only going to use 10 threads.
We can then define the executer that we'll use,
and then finally create a blocking queue.
This blocking queue will hold the work that has to be done,
and that work will be represented by a client object.
A blocking queue lets us take items from the head of the queue,
if there are any,
but blocks if we try and take anything from the queue and the queue is empty,
which is exactly the behavior that we need.
So we create an instance of blocking queue that holds client instances,
and create the client class with this, just to keep the compiler happy.
And we'll define that class as we go through the rest of this example.
We also need a static method on the listener that we
use to add clients to this queue.
As we'll see in a moment,
each client will be associated with an async context
and do its work through that context.
Each client will be created in the servlet when a request comes in,
and the servlet will need to add that client to this queue.
So the executer can pick up my client and put it to work.
And we'll use the static method to do that.
We now need to add the contextInitialized method.
In here we are going to set up the executer.
Remember, we set the thread limit to 10.
So we created 10 threads and have them call a helper
method named sendDataToClient, which we'll create now.
Before we do that,
we need another helper method that retrieves the client from the blocking queue.
So let's create a method called getClient that returns a client.
Remember that the take call on the blocking queue returns
and item or blocks if the queue is empty.
So this is the behavior of this getClient call.
We can now fill in some of the sendDataToClient method.
Remember, this is called on the executer thread,
and its job is to service clients on that thread.
In here, we loop forever.
The first thing inside the loop is to call getClient,
and remember, this will either return a client so we can process it,
or block if there's no client available.
Previously, we said that a client would be associated with an async context.
So if there is a client, then we get its async context.
And add that method here.
We'll fill in the details later and get the servlet
response object from that context.
We set the response type, plain text in this case,
as we are only simulating file downloads.
Then we call two more helpers, getDataToSend and sendDataChunk.
The first call simulates us loading a file to send to the browser,
and the second simulates us sending that file in chunks.
In the getDataToSend method, we simulate the client working,
so call a doWork method on the client.
Again we'll add an empty method here and implement it in a moment.
The sendDataChunk method is where most of the work happens.
In here, we add a try catch block to catch any errors.
We then take the passed-in response object, and from that get the writer.
Remember, we are only simulating output here,
so normally we'd be sending raw data bytes.
But in this example, we're just sending back text.
Remember, we are only simulating output here,
so normally we would be sending raw data bytes,
but in this example we are just sending back text.
So the client only sends back data in chunks,
so we need to know when it's finished.
To know that, we add an isWorkDone method to the client,
and this method which is a Boolean.
If it returns true, then the client is finished sending its data,
if it returns false, there's more work to do.
In the first case, we're done and we call complete on the async context.
If the client hasn't finished, then we add it back to the queue.
This means that as the executors thread run and try
to take a client from the queue,
but at some point they will get back to this client,
and it will send this next chunk of data.
Inside the catch we don't report the error,
we just mark the async context as being complete.
So let's go over this.
We have an executer with 10 threads, we have a blocking queue that holds clients,
and a method to add clients to that queue.
We initialize the executer in the contextInitialize method.
We send data to clients,
sendDataToClients gets the clients from the blocking queue,
uses that client's async context, and then calls a sendDataChunk.
SendDataChunk sends a chunk of data, then asks the client if it is complete.
If it is, then it calls complete on the async context,
if it's not,
then it puts the client back into the queue to be processed further later.
Okay, so let's finish implementing the client.
In here, let's add a constructor that takes an async context,
and save that in a local variable,
and also a variable so the client knows how many
bytes have been sent previously.
Let's implement the getAsyncContext method to return the async context.
The getBytesSent method returns the number of bytes sent,
the isWorkDone method returns true if more than 100 bytes have been sent,
and false otherwise.
Remember, this is a simulation.
Finally, let's implement doWork.
This is going to be simple.
We'll sleep the thread for 2 seconds,
and then add 10 for the count of bytes sent.
That Thread.sleep simulates our client doing a lot of work.
Let's now finish off the servlet.
In here, the request comes in.
We're going to create a client and call a static
ClientTransfer.addClient method.
When we create the client,
we pass the new async context so that this client can work asynchronously.
This request thread then hands it back to the servlet container.
We're going to call this async code from JavaScript,
so we need a page to load that JavaScript and execute it.
To do that, we add a new ControllerServlet and have it dispatch to a JSP page.
We're going to call this async code from JavaScript,
so we need a page to load that JavaScript and execute it.
To do that, we add a new ControllerServlet and have it dispatched to a JSP page.
That JSP page has a button within JavaScript that
executes when we click on that button.
This JavaScript sends a GET request to the download servlet,
and then writes a log message to the browser's console window.
If we deploy and use the browser to go to the ControllerServlet,
we can now open the Network tab in Chrome's Developer Tools,
and then we can click on the Get button,
and we can see the call is pending inside the Network tab.
It will be pending until all the data has been retrieved.
When it completes,
we can see the messages in the console that shows the data arriving in chunks.
And this would have taken a long time, upwards of 10 seconds,
but during this time, we're not holding onto one of the container's threads, but instead we're executing a download on a background thread.